Common Table Expressions (CTEs) in SQL
1. What is a CTE?
A Common Table Expression (CTE) is a temporary result set in SQL that you can reference within a SELECT, INSERT, UPDATE, or DELETE statement. 
CTEs allow for better readability, reusability, and organization of complex queries by allowing you to define a query in a modular way.

CTEs can be thought of as a named temporary result set that exists only during the execution of a query. Once the query completes, the CTE is no longer available.

2. Syntax of a CTE
The syntax for a CTE is as follows:

sql
Copy code
WITH cte_name AS (
    -- SELECT statement or query
    SELECT column1, column2
    FROM table_name
    WHERE condition
)
-- Main query
SELECT * FROM cte_name;
WITH: The keyword used to define a CTE.
cte_name: The name of the CTE, which can be used in the main query.
SELECT statement: The query that defines the data in the CTE.
The CTE can then be referenced by its name (e.g., cte_name) in the main query that follows the CTE definition.
3. Real-Time Example of CTE
Suppose we have a Sales table with the following columns: SaleID, SaleAmount, SaleDate, and EmployeeID. 
You want to calculate the total sales for each employee and then find out the top 3 employees who made the highest total sales.

Example 1: Simple CTE
Let's first create a simple CTE to calculate the total sales per employee.

sql
Copy code
WITH EmployeeSales AS (
    SELECT EmployeeID, SUM(SaleAmount) AS TotalSales
    FROM Sales
    GROUP BY EmployeeID
)
SELECT * FROM EmployeeSales;
Explanation:
The CTE EmployeeSales calculates the total sales for each EmployeeID.
The SELECT statement after the CTE retrieves the result of the CTE.
The CTE makes the query cleaner and easier to understand.
Example 2: Using CTE in Complex Query
Now, let’s say you want to find the top 3 employees who made the highest total sales. You can use the CTE we created earlier and apply the ORDER BY and LIMIT clauses in the main query.

sql
Copy code
WITH EmployeeSales AS (
    SELECT EmployeeID, SUM(SaleAmount) AS TotalSales
    FROM Sales
    GROUP BY EmployeeID
)
SELECT EmployeeID, TotalSales
FROM EmployeeSales
ORDER BY TotalSales DESC
LIMIT 3;
Explanation:
The CTE EmployeeSales calculates the total sales for each employee.
In the main query, we order the results by TotalSales in descending order to get the top employees with the highest sales.
LIMIT 3 restricts the results to only the top 3 employees.
4. Recursive CTEs
A recursive CTE is a type of CTE that references itself in order to perform recursive operations, such as traversing hierarchical data (e.g., organizational charts, category hierarchies, etc.).

Example 3: Recursive CTE
Let's say we have an Employees table with columns EmployeeID, ManagerID, and EmployeeName, representing a hierarchical structure of employees where each employee has a manager. 
We want to find all employees under a particular manager (including indirect reports).

sql
Copy code
WITH RECURSIVE EmployeeHierarchy AS (
    -- Base case: Select the manager (top level)
    SELECT EmployeeID, ManagerID, EmployeeName
    FROM Employees
    WHERE ManagerID IS NULL  -- Assuming top-level managers have no manager

    UNION ALL

    -- Recursive case: Select employees under the manager
    SELECT e.EmployeeID, e.ManagerID, e.EmployeeName
    FROM Employees e
    INNER JOIN EmployeeHierarchy eh ON e.ManagerID = eh.EmployeeID
)
SELECT * FROM EmployeeHierarchy;
Explanation:
The WITH RECURSIVE keyword allows for recursion in the CTE.
The base case selects the top-level managers (those with no manager).
The recursive case selects employees who report to the current level of managers, and it keeps going down the hierarchy until no more employees are found.
UNION ALL is used to combine the base case and the recursive case.
This query will return all employees who report directly or indirectly to a top-level manager, traversing the entire hierarchy.
5. Advantages of Using CTEs
Improved Readability: Complex queries can be broken down into manageable and understandable parts by defining subqueries within CTEs.
Reusability: CTEs can be referenced multiple times in the main query, which eliminates the need for duplicate subqueries.
Modularization: You can write modular and maintainable code by separating different parts of the query into logically named CTEs.
Recursive Operations: CTEs allow for recursion, which is useful for hierarchical data such as organizational structures or category trees.
6. When to Use CTEs?
For readability: If you have complex queries with multiple subqueries, consider using a CTE to simplify the logic and make your query more readable.
For modularization: When you need to break down a complex calculation into separate parts, CTEs can help organize the query logically.
For recursion: If you need to perform recursive operations (like traversing a hierarchy), CTEs are the best tool.
Key Takeaways
CTEs are temporary result sets defined within a SQL query. They are created using the WITH keyword and can be referenced in the main query.
Recursive CTEs allow you to perform operations on hierarchical data (such as employee-manager relationships).
CTEs improve query readability, reusability, and organization, especially in complex queries.
Recursive CTEs are powerful for working with hierarchical data structures.
CTEs are an important tool for writing clean, efficient, and maintainable SQL code, and they are widely used in real-world scenarios, especially when dealing with complex data manipulations or hierarchical data.
